Opioid (Narcotic)
Analgesics and
Antagonists
Walter C. Prozialeck, Ph.D.
Department of Pharmacology
CCOM/Midwestern University
Downers Grove, IL 60515

Overview of Drug Classes
Strong Analgesics ( agonists)
*morphine
alfentanil (Alfenta)
*codeine
*fentanyl (Sublimaze)
*heroin
*hydrocodone (Vicodin, Lortab, Zohydro ER)
*hydromorphone (Dilaudid)
levomethadyl acetate (Orlaam)
levorphanol (Levo-Droman)
*meperidine (Demerol)
*methadone (Dolophine)
*oxycodone (Percodan, Percocet, OxyContin)
oxymorphone (Numorphan)
propoxyphene (Darvon)
sufentanil (Sufenta)

Partial Agonists and Mixed
Agonist/Antagonist Analgesics
*pentazocine (Talwin)
*buprenorphine (Buprenex, Subutrex,
Suboxone)
*butorphanol (Stadol)
*tramadol (Ultram)
*tapentadol (Nucynta)
– OK for moderate pain, but not as effective as
morphine for severe pain.

Opioid Antagonists
*naloxone (Narcan)
nalmefene (Revex)
*naltrexone (ReVia)
*methylnaltrexone (Relistor)
*alvimpoan (Entereg)

Terminology
In common usage, these terms are used
interchangeably even though they,
technically, have somewhat different
meanings.
– opiate - derived from opium
– opioid - having properties similar to drugs
derived from opium
– narcotic – technically means "sleep inducing"
but is commonly taken to mean "opioid"

Chemistry and Structure
Activity Relationships
phenanthrene alkaloid
phenyl-N-methyl piperidine is
the essential moiety
substitutions
– methyl - at positions 3 or 6
(codeine is 3 - 0 methyl
morphine)
– acetyl - at positions 3 or 6 (heroin
is 3,6 - diacetyl morphine)
– allyl or methylcyclopropyl - at
position 17; confers antagonist
activity

Opioid Receptors
 receptors are located primarily in the brainstem, spinal cord, and
limbic areas and are thought to mediate supraspinal analgesia,
some spinal analgesia, sedation, respiratory depression, euphoria
and dependence.
 receptors are located mainly in the brainstem and spinal cord,
and to a lesser extent, the limbic system. They are thought to
mediate some spinal analgesia, some supraspinal analgesia,
miosis, sedation, and dysphoria.
 receptors are located in the brainstem and limbic system, and
Receptor Types
mediate dysphoria and hallucinations
 (mu)

 (kappa)

 (delta)

Morphine

+++

+

+

Hydromorphone

+++

+

+

Pentazocine

+/-

++

?

Nalbuphine

-

++

?

++

-

?

-

-

-

Drug

Buprenorphine
Naloxone
+
?

agonist activity
antagonist activity
not certain

Morphine

Methadone

Naloxone

Codeine

Heroin

Hydromorphone

Meperidine
Propoxyphene

Nalorphine

Pentazocine

Morphine

Active portion of
morphine molecule

Met or Leu eukephalin

Pharmacologic Actions of Morphine
Analgesia - as described
Sedation and mental clouding
– Note: Although morphine does produce sedation and
cause drowsiness, the effects are qualitatively
different from those produced by other CNS
depressants (barbiturates, alcohol. etc..).
Therapeutic doses of morphine produce a floating,
dream-like state from which the patient normally can
be aroused. However, in overdose situations,
morphine and other opioids can cause the graded
depression of cortical function: Mental Clouding and
Sedation  Hypnosis or Stupor  Coma  Death

Relief of anxiety and apprehension, particularly in
individuals with pain.
Euphoria (usually) - Dysphoria (occasionally) Subjectively, the effects of morphine are usually
perceived as pleasant, particularly in individuals with
pain. The drug causes analgesia and produces a
floating dream-like state of tranquility. The individual
may drift in and out of a pleasant sleep from which they
can easily be aroused. Although the effects of morphine
are generally perceived as pleasant, some individuals
may experience unpleasant subjective effects
(dysphoria). These individuals may experience fear,
anxiety, hallucinations, and nausea. It is worth noting
that these adverse reactions tend to be more common in
females and in pain-free individuals who receive or take
opioids. In certain species (particularly cats), morphine
causes excitement and a rage reaction.

Nausea
– due to stimulation of the chemoreceptor
trigger zone (CRTZ) in medulla, also may
involve vestibular system.
– more common in ambulatory patients than in
recumbent patients
– tolerance develops - with chronic use, the
CRTZ may actually become de-sensitized

Depression of respiration
– major toxic effect - usual cause of death in opioid
poisoning
– decreased sensitivity to CO2 at chemoreceptors in
medulla
– use with caution in patients with impaired respiratory
function
Note: One beneficial effect of respiratory depression by
morphine is applicable in the treatment of pulmonary
edema with its frightening and unpleasant symptoms or
air hunger. In this condition, the struggle to breath
aggravates the pathophysiology of the edema. Morphine
gives partial relief in acute pulmonary edema by
alleviating the patient's conscious awareness of
respiratory distress. After a moderately large dose of
morphine, the patient will not struggle to breath. This actually
improves the patient’s physiologic state and is beneficial. In
addition, morphine causes peripheral vasodilation. This
decreases both preload and afterload on the heart, which is
also beneficial to the patient.

Constriction of pupils
– due to an action in the nucleus of Edinger Westfall
– "Pin point" pupils is one of the tell-tale
signs of opioid poisoning!
– tolerance does not usually develop to this
effect

Antitussive effect
– depression of cough control center in the medulla
– opioids, particularly codeine and its analogs, are
widely used as antitussives
Note: Morphine and related opioids cause the release of
histamine and may aggravate asthma or obstructive
pulmonary disease. Opioids should be used only with
extreme caution in such patients. They also can cause
itching of the skin. H-1 histamine antagonists such as
dephenhydramine (Benadryl) can alleviate this effect.

Lowering of Seizure Threshold
– Use with caution in seizure-prone patients

Endocrine disturbances
– decreased secretion of gonadotropins,
corticosteroids and prolactin
– menstrual disturbances in females and
impotence in males are common in chronic
opioid users

Effects on smooth muscle - increased tone of
circular smooth muscle, decrease in
propulsive movements of longitudinal
muscle
– decreased intestinal motility - constipation is a
common side effect
– urine retention - often have to catheterize patients
who received opioids
– bronchoconstriction - may cause serious problems
in asthmatics and patients with obstructive pulmonary
disease.
– increased biliary pressure due to constriction of the
bile duct
Note: Some, but not all of the effects of morphine on smooth
muscle can be blocked by atropine or similar antimuscarinic
drugs.

Cardiovascular effects
– postural (orthostatic) hypotension due to
release of histamine and interference with
hemostatic reflexes
– cutaneous vasodilation - due to release of
histamine, causes a warm flushing of the skin.
Some patients may experience pruitis that
can be alleviated by H-1 histamine
antagonists.
– increased CSF pressure
due to buildup of CO2 and resulting cerebral
vasodilation
use only with caution in patients with head
injuries

Skeletal Muscle Rigidity
– occurs at high doses and may cause
problems when opioids are used as adjuncts
for surgical anesthesia.

Immunosuppression
– seen especially with chronic usage
– may complicate use of opioids in
immunocompromised patients or may
contribute to the pathogenesis of immune
disorders such as AIDS.

Pharmacokinetics of Morphine
Route of Administration - traditionally IM or
SC, although IV is widely used for in patients.
Spinal routes although and oral preparations are
becoming more widely used for severe pain. In
addition, morphine and related agents such as
heroin are sometimes "snorted" for abuse
purposes.
– Note: Morphine is considerably less potent orally
because of significant "first pass" effect. (i.e. about
75% of the dose is metabolized during its passage
through the liver). Still, it can be given orally in high
doses for the management of chronic, severe pain.

Pharmacokinetics (Cont.)
rapid onset after parenteral administration; maximal
analgesic action within one hour of injection.
duration of analgesia is approximately 4-6 hours.
t½ = 2-3 hours: may be longer in elderly patients.
metabolism in the liver (glucuronide formation)
excretion - 90% in the urine primarily as metabolites in
24 hours. 7-10% in the feces.
morphine and other opioids readily cross the placental
barrier and can affect the fetus resulting in respiratory
depression or even drug dependence with chronic use.
– Note: The standard therapeutic dose of morphine is 10 mg
SC or IM. This is the dose to which all other analgesic
drugs are compared.

Major Drug Interactions
additive effects with other CNS depressants (alcohol, barbiturates,
benzodiazepines, antipsychotics, antidepressants, antihistamines)
MAO inhibitors - reports of severe hyperpyrexia and coma,
especially with meperidine (Demerol) but it can occur with all
opioids.
abuse with amphetamines and cocaine - mixture is called a
"speedball".
Some opioids are used in combinations with other analgesics (e.g.
aspirin, acetaminophen or ibuprofen) - By acting through different
mechanisms, the drugs in combination produce an enhanced
analgesic effect.
Certain antihistamines (e.g. hydroxyzine (Vistaril) can enhance the
analgesic effects of opioids. A drug combination that was popular a
few years ago, but which has fallen out of favor is meperidine plus
hydroxyzine (Demerol + Vistaril)
Tricyclic antidepressants can enhance the analgesic effects of
opioids and are sometimes included in the regimens for the
management of chronic, severe pain.

Opioid Poisoning
Symptoms - characteristic triad
– CNS depression - stupor or coma
– depressed depth and rate of respiration
– pin point pupils
Note: If the patient is severely hypoxic (i.e. very close to
death) the pupils may be dilated.

Treatment
– Support respiration - be prepared to mechanically
ventilate the patient. Be aware that administration of
O2 may remove the hypoxic drive for respiration and
cause apnea.
– Administer a narcotic antagonist such as naloxone
(NARCAN).

Common Uses of Morphine and
Related Drugs
Moderate - severe pain
Treatment of chronic pain
Adjuncts to surgical anesthesia
Antitussives
Antidiarrheals
Dyspnea of left heart failure and
pulmonary edema
Abuse

*Morphine (sulfate salt)
route of administration - absorbed from GI tract,
but not as effective orally because of first pass
metabolism; however, oral forms are available.
Morphine can be given subcutaneously, IM or
IV. In addition it is now widely used for various
types of spinal analgesia.
usual dose is 10 mg SC or IM; or 10-30 mg P.O.,
although with severe, chronic pain, higher doses
may be needed.
used for more severe pain

The ways in which morphine and related
opioids are used have changed
dramatically in the past few years. Three
of the most important developments are:
– infusion and autoinjector systems
– PCA (patient controlled analgesia)
– spinal analgesia

*Codeine (phosphate or sulfate salt)
route of administration - orally effective
dose - 1/12 the potency of morphine; common
doses are 30-60 mg P.O.
codeine molecule is only a weak opioid agonist,
but in most patients codeine is metabolized to
morphine; genetic differences in metabolism
may explain individual differences in sensitivity
to codeine
uses
– analgesic for mild-moderate pain
– antitussive

*Hydromorphone (Dilaudid, Palladone) similar to morphine but more potent
*Oxycodone (Roxicodone, Percodan,
OxyContin) - similar to both morphine and
codeine, but used orally (usually in combinations
with acetaminophen) for mild-moderate pain.
OxyContin is a sustained release oral
preparation for the management of severe
chronic pain.
*Hydrocodone (Vicodin, Norco, and many
others) - similar both to morphine and codeine;
used orally for mild-moderate pain and as an
antitussive; is currently one of the most widely
prescribed opioids. On 10/8/14, it was
reclassified as C-2 from C-3.

*Meperidine (Demerol)
synthetic drug
route of administration - oral and parenteral
1/10 the potency of morphine
reputed to have weaker effects on smooth muscle than
morphine - less constipation and urine retention,
although the evidence to support this is weak.
has been used for moderate to severe pain
has been commonly used in obstetrics - may cause less
respiratory depression in the newborn than morphine
relatively short acting 1-3 hours; not appropriate for
chronic pain because of the buildup of an active
metabolite (normeperidine) that can cause seizures.
falling into disfavor in many circles.

*Heroin (diacetylmorphine)
more potent and more euphoric than
morphine; duration of action about 4-6
hours.
available for medical use in some
countries, but not in the US
abuse
commonly taken by injection, snorting or
smoking

*Methadone (Dolophine)
less euphoric and longer duration of action (1224 hours) than heroin (4-6 hours) or morphine
(4-6 hours)
used as an analgesic and in treating opioid
addiction
dosing can be tricky and needs to be done
carefully, with close monitoring of the patient.
– Note: When used acutely as an analgesic,
methadone has a duration of action of 4-6 hours.
However, when used chronically (as in methadone
maintenance for the treatment of opioid dependence,
or for the management of chronic pain), it has a
duration of action of 12-24 hours.

*Methadone
When used for opioid addiction, it can only
be dispensed through licensed clinics.
Good analgesic for severe pain.
Long –acting, orally-effective, little
euphoria
Stigma associated with its use in the
treatment of heroin addiction.
Dosing can be difficult and needs to be
done carefully.

*Fentanyl (Sublimaze) - very potent mu agonist
(about 100 x more potent than morphine) - given
parenterally to supplement surgical anesthesia.
A transdermal preparation (Duragesic) is
available for the management of chronic pain. A
combination preparation containing fentanyl
plus droperidol (Innovar) can induce a state
called neuroleptic analgesia. In this state,
various diagnostic (e.g. endoscopies, etc..) or
minor surgical procedures may be carried out
even though the patient might not completely
lose consciousness. Administering nitrous oxide
in conjunction with Innovar will produce a state
called neuroleptic anesthesia.
Sufentanil (Sufenta) and Alfentanil (Alfenta) similar to Fentanyl - used I.V. as adjuncts for
surgical anesthesia.

*Opioid Combination Preparations - Most contain
either codeine, hydrocodone, oxycodone, or
propoxyphene in combination with either aspirin,
acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Note that when these
combination products are used at very high doses
needed to control severe pain, the patient may be
exposed to potentially toxic doses of acetaminophen,
aspirin or ibuprofen. Some examples are:
– Codeine/Acetaminophen (Tylenol with Codeine and generic
preparations.
– Codeine/Aspirin (Empirin and generics)
– Hydrocodone/Acetaminophen (Vicodin, Lortab, Norco, others)
– Hydrocodone/Ibuprofen (Vicoprofen)
– Oxycodone/Acetaminophen (Percocet, Percodan, Tylox, and
others)

Problems with Opioid Combination
Products for Severe Pain
Vicodin = 5 mg hydrocodone + 500 mg
acetaminophen (Do not exceed 8/day)
10 mg morphine SC = 20 mg
hydrocordone PO
20 mg hydrocodone = 4 Vicodin
4 Vicodin = 2 g acetaminophen
4-6 x per day = 8-10 g of acetaminophen!

Mixed Agonist-Antagonists
*Pentazocine (Talwin; Talwin NX)
– agonist effects are dominant - acts as an agonist at  (kappa)
receptors, but only as a partial agonist at  (mu) receptors; it acts
as a  antagonist at high doses.
– less effective than morphine for severe pain
– sedation and respiratory depression are less than with morphine
– CNS stimulation and hallucinations are more common than with
morphine
– with chronic use, the potential for physical dependence is less
than morphine, but still significant
– can precipitate withdrawal syndrome in opioid addicts
– Talwin Nx is a preparation that contains petazocine and
naloxone. The latter is included to reduce the potential for IV
abuse.

GI Tract

Systemic
Circ.
Liver

OP
N

*Buprenorphine (Buprenex, Subutrex, Suboxone,
Butrans))
– acts as a partial agonist at -receptors and possibly -receptors.
– Although its analgesic effects may be slightly less than that of
morphine, its abuse potential is reported to be much lower.
– It has been reported to reduce drug craving in heroin addicts and
is being used in the treatment of heroin addiction. Suboxone is
a new combination product containing buprenorphine plus
nalaxone designed for sublingual use. When taken as directed,
the naloxone does not reach a therapeutic blood level and the
buprenorphine can produce its effects. However, if the user tries
to inject the drug to achieve a high, the naloxone will block the
effects of the buprenorphine.
– Although it is usually given by injection, it is also effective when
administered sublingually, intranasally, or transdermally.
– Buprenorphine is the primary agent used for the so-called “office
based” treatment of opioid addiction.

*Tramadol (Ultram)
newer drug for use in mild-moderate pain.
It supposedly is a weak mu agonist. In addition, it
inhibits the synaptic reuptake of norepinephrine and
serotonin, much like the tricyclic antidepressants.
It supposedly produces good analgesia, with only mild
side effects. In general, the side effects resemble those
of other opioids (dizziness, sedation, nausea,
constipation).
The manufacturer has claimed that the drug has a very
low abuse and addiction potential. However, there are a
significant number of reports indicating that the drug has
opioid-like abuse potential.

Drug Abuse and Dependence
Tramadol may induce psychic and physical dependence of
the morphine-type (-opioid). (See WARNINGS).
Dependence and abuse, including drug-seeking behavior
and taking illicit actions to obtain the drug are not limited to
those patients with a prior history of opioid dependence.
The risk in patients with substance abuse has been
observed to be higher. Tramadol is associated with craving
and tolerance development. Withdrawal symptoms may
occur if tramadol is discontinued abruptly. These
symptoms may include: anxiety, sweating, insomnia,
rigors, pain, nausea, tremors, diarrhea, upper respiratory
symptons, piloerection and rarely hallucinations. Clinical
experience suggests that withdrawal symptoms may be
relieved by reinstitution of opioid therapy followed by a
gradual, tapered dose reduction of the medication
combined with symptomatic support.

Tapentadol (Nucynta)
Newer drug that is similar to tramadol,
except that it has stronger agonist activity
at mu receptors. It also inhibits reupyake
of NE and 5-HT.
More effective for pain than tramadol, but
also greater abuse potential.
Classified as Shedule II drug.

*Naloxone (Narcan) - drug of choice for opioid
poisoning, can reverse the respiratory
depressant effects of opioids
– not effective orally, because of first pass metabolism,
must be given parenterally
– sometimes included in combination with oral narcotic
analgesics (eg. Talwin NX) to prevent abuse (i.e.
injection of the drug)
– relatively short duration of action (i.e. only about 1-2
hours)
– can precipitate withdrawal in addicts
– has been tried for a variety of conditions (eg.
prevention of post traumatic neuronal injury, shock.)

*Naltrexone (Trexan, ReVia)
orally effective, long acting antagonist (24 hours)
used in "immunizing" addicts (ie. preventing the high
produced by opioid agonists)
risk of hepatotoxicity is a serious drawback
its effectiveness in the long-term treatment of opioid
dependence is not clear
patient compliance is a major problem
Keep in mid that an opioid addict must first be detoxified
(ie. brought through withdrawal) before naltrexone
therapy can be initiated.
It has recently been shown to decrease the craving for
alcohol in alcoholics. It is now approved for use in the
treatment of alcoholism.

*Methylnaltrexone (Relistor)
Quaternary analog of naloxone recently
approved for the treatment/prevention of
opioid-induced constipation.
Must be given parenterally, usually SC
Only appropriate for serious constipation
resulting from use higher doses of opiods
for more severe pain.

Opioid Dependence and Addiction
Physical Dependence
– tolerance - develops to some effects more than others. For
example, there can be a high degree of tolerance to the
analgesic, euphoric and sedative effects of opioids whereas
there is usually little tolerance to opioid-induced miosis or
constipation.
– withdrawal syndrome

Characteristics of the Acute Withdrawal Syndrome
(opposite of drug effects)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

craving for drug
anxiety, insomnia
dilation of pupils
severe GI hypermotility
hypertension and tachycardia
"goose flesh"
yawning and sweating

Duration and Intensity of Acute
Withdrawal
– short acting drug (e.g. heroin) - intense
symptoms, short duration (2-3 days)
– long acting drug (e.g. methadone) - moderate
symptoms, long duration (4-7 days)
– Note: The acute withdrawal phase is often
followed by prolonged syndrome consisting of
mild anxiety irritability, sleep disturbances and
autonomic excitability than may last for
several weeks - months.

Treatment of Dependence
– "cold turkey"
– weaning patient off the drug
– methadone
– substitution - wean patient off drug
– maintenance - maintain patient on drug
– buprenorphine is also being used
– naltrexone (Trexan) - long acting opioid
antagonist
– clonidine (Catapress) - will suppress some
withdrawal symptoms

Dependence in a Medical Setting vs.
Dependence in a Street Setting
Keep in mind that opioid dependence in a medical setting is
markedly different from opioid addiction in a street setting. In a
medical setting, patients may become addicted while chronically
receiving opioids for medically valid reasons. Under such
conditions, they receive known doses of pure drug under strictly
controlled conditions. Usually, the patient can be weaned off the
drug with minimal discomfort and little potential for continuing
addiction. By contrast, in a street setting, the drug abuser actively
seeks an illegal drug for its mind altering effects. Often the pattern
of abuse involves the taking of unknown doses of impure drugs
under very unsanitary conditions. In addition, the addict must often
resort to crime or prostitution to support their habit.
– health hazards associated with the street use of narcotics
hepatitis
miscellaneous infections
AIDS

– socioeconomic aspects of the problem


